eventually I came to understand that the
many deaths that one endures in this
process are actually that death is
actually a symptom of purification the
form that you are can die the structures
of your life can be shattered but the
Inner Essence of your being cannot die
and I began to realize that death what
we experience as death is actually a
deep form of purification which is
letting go of the small
in order to welcome and be welcomed by
that which is larger
[Music]
Hello friends
welcome
I'm so happy that you're here with us
for insights at the edge live in this
episode of insights at the edge my guess
is Christopher M BH PhD
let me tell you a little bit about Chris
he's professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University
where he taught for 33 years he's also
adjunct faculty at the California
Institute of integral studies Emeritus
fellow at The Institute of noetic
Sciences and he's on the advisory
Council of Groff Legacy training he's
written several books including Dark
Knight early Dawn the living classroom
and a book that got my attention some
friends of mine said I'm reading this
book it's called LSD and the mind of the
universe you've got to read it it's so
engrossing it's a page Turner it will
actually introduce you what the mind of
the universe what's that and
you know if there was ever a moment
where I think it's appropriate to say
this conversation is a conversation that
truly will be filled with insights at
the edge it's this conversation with
Chris Bates Chris welcome
hi Tammy it's a pleasure to be here with
you this evening
tell us a little bit right here at the
beginning
what prompted you
to engage ready for this over 20 years
in 73
high dose LSD sessions that were
structured in a specific way for the
purpose of deep Spiritual Awakening and
exploring the nature of the cosmos what
inspired you to engage in such what
we'll learn it was really an arduous
undertaking
well I had just finished graduate school
I got my PhD from Brown University in
philosophy of religion I had published
my dissertation in a series of Articles
and was looking for where to take my
work next
and at that point in my life I met the
work of Ian Stevenson and reincarnation
research at Virginia and more
importantly of Stan Groff
and as soon as I read Realms of the
human unconscious which had just been
published this was in 78 when I started
uh I immediately saw the profound
implications for Stan's work for
philosophy of religion not just for
psychology and I knew I wanted to get
involved in doing this work
um
so even though LSD had been made illegal
at by that time this is it had been made
illegal 1970
I chose to conscientiously break the law
and to begin a series of rigorously
structured following Stan's protocol
of LSD sessions and
I chose after three medium dose sessions
to work at high doses this is a protocol
I don't recommend today I would be much
gentler on myself if I were doing it
over again but at the time
I did this is what I was doing to
explore to accelerate my own Spiritual
Development and then quickly it evolved
into
engaging the Deep structures of human
evolution and trying to support
Humanities Spiritual Development and
then exploring this marvelous universe
that we are part of
you right towards the beginning of the
book in the end what's important is not
the method of exploration used but what
this method shows us about the
extraordinary Universe we live in and
that's what I want to focus on in our
conversation is really the discoveries
that you made and why don't we start off
with the title of the book
LSD and here we go the mind of the
universe I'm not sure everyone even can
track with you there the universe has a
mind tell us what you discovered about
this
well as I came to experience it I
experienced Consciousness as like an
infinite ocean
and when we open ourselves in deep
psychedelic States it's like our mind is
a seed Catalyst that we drop into this
ocean and it crystallizes a set of
experiences out of this infinite
potential
and by absorbing these experiences and
internalizing them and learning what we
are being offered who are being being
taught uh we're changed we're purified
we're we're changed inwardly and then
when we drop that changed mind into this
infinite potential it triggers an even
deeper set of experiences out of out of
its Infinity
and I always experienced myself as
engaging on intelligence a Consciousness
that was directing my sessions I mean I
never did not control what was unfolding
in my sessions I was always yielding and
following a lead that came from
conscious deeper levels of consciousness
and as the journey continued
that the levels of consciousness that I
was entering deep in several times
multiple times and so what do we call
this infinite Consciousness that's been
called many things in the world's
mystical Traditions
I hesitate to call it God though I do
refer to it as the Divine because God
has so many layers of historical
historical overlay which I I wouldn't
want to affirm
so just to give them some sense of the
approximation of the vast scale and
scope of this Consciousness I call it
the mind of the universe now just as the
the universe has a body it has a mind
and you can't our mind is as our body is
a product of our universe our mind is
also a product of the universe and when
we sink deeply into our Consciousness we
come out into a vast Consciousness which
you can think of as the Divine
Consciousness or you can think of it as
the mind of the universe
now you use this word purification and I
referred to the 73 Journeys that you
went on as having a quality of
arduousness to at least it read that way
to me as you include much of the
descriptions of what you went through in
each one of these Journeys I mean in the
beginning you know what you're writing
about is seizures
vomiting
convulsions it sounded really rough why
was that do you think now in retrospect
as you look back why was all of that
physical and energetic purification
necessary
well there are many levels of answers to
that but basically
if we want to move into deeper intimacy
with the consciousness of the universe
we're moving into States Of
Consciousness which are large which are
vast
and operated a much higher level of a
much higher frequency much higher energy
level and our egoic Consciousness the
Consciousness which surrounds our body
in a sense and which is the
Consciousness that we are
operationalizing as egoic Consciousness
is just too small uh we have to let go
of that Consciousness and some people
find that easier and more difficult but
letting go of that Consciousness and and
dying as an at the egoic level and
entering into spiritual reality I found
is actually the first of many cycles of
death and rebirth because the universe
has many levels in many dimensions to it
uh
in order to enter each successive deeper
level we have to go through a deeper
level of surrender and that often
involves very intense uh purification
confrontations and every step deeper
into the universe is a step into a
higher bandwidth of energy if you will
we have to literally learn to become a
being who can live can live at that
level become operational that level for
hours and hours at a time and that takes
that takes work it's it's it takes a lot
of work
you you write in the context of a
psychedelic session pain is something we
learn to embrace one learns to reverse
one's instinct to avoid suffering and to
open to it instead not because we like
to suffer but because of what lies on
the other side of suffering yes and I
wanted to understand more about what you
learned about embracing pain and I asked
this question Chris because
in the midst of Our Lives there's so
much pain we need to embrace and so much
letting go that we have to do and I I
don't think that many of us are that
good at it hmm
well I want to be careful I don't want
to over generalize the the insights or
truths that emerge in a psychedelic
session and apply them to certain
circumstances in our everyday life so
we'll we'd have to make some necessary
adjustments to it but in a psychedelic
session when we hyper amplify
Consciousness Consciousness begins to
clean itself it begins to transform
itself and as it purifies itself and as
it goes through these
first we encounter unfinished business
you know things would rather not face
things we're scared of things that
frighten us but that's only early layers
eventually we're going through layers in
which we're sloughing off not only our
personal identity but we're sloughing
off our identity as a human being per se
and then our identity as a time space
being as we're moving beyond a linear
time and Beyond three-dimensional space
um
all of these adjustments to move into
these deeper states of consciousness
involve uh again when you're working
with high doses of a psychedelic like
LSD it it it intensifies and accelerates
this purification process if you took an
ice cube and put it next to a candle
meaning analogy for a gentler spiritual
practice the candle would melt the ice
cube very gently and it would weep and
it would dissolve but if you threw the
same Ice Cube on a hot Skillet it would
bump around jump around and snap crackle
and pop as the molecules exploded and
psychedelic sessions are kind of like
the latter
you're doing the same process that you
do in deep Long contemplative Retreat
context but you're doing it faster and
because you're doing it faster there's
more of a kind of a convulsive quality
to it there's more intense quality to it
but essentially it is the same as
traditional spiritual practitioners
undergoing The Dark Knight of the soul
in these processes it's the same process
eventually I came to understand that the
many deaths that one endures in this
process are actually that death is
actually a symptom of purification
once you've died several times and been
reborn on the other side of that process
you realize you can't die it's
impossible to Die the form that you are
can die the structures of your life can
be shattered but the Inner Essence of
your being cannot die so that death
itself begins to lose its category it
becomes to be a non-functional category
and I began to realize that death what
we experience as death is actually a
deep form of purification which is
letting go of the small
in order to welcome and be welcomed by
that which is larger
which brings me to wanting to make sure
that we carefully parse out but I still
want to address here in the midst of Our
Lives not in the midst of psychedelic
sessions what did you learn about what
it takes to die before we die that's
really what I want to understand yeah
foreign I want to be careful because I
would I don't want to frame my work in
terms of the Dynamics of Spiritual
Awakening and that phrasing to die
before we die so that we do not die when
we die is kind of really oriented around
the Dynamics of Spiritual Awakening in
my sense in my work even though I began
this work with the thought of an
Awakening A Spiritual Awakening agenda
it became much more than that it became
an adventure of exploring the Deep
structure of the universe itself and so
um death changes as one goes as one
pivots from Spiritual Awakening as a
project to cosmological exploration as a
project but what I learned uh
if I were to try to summarize it in some
way uh
first I have no fear of death whatsoever
I have no fear of dying I feel like I've
died many times in that process and in
that process of dying before you die
physically there is a great relaxation
that settles in on the an abiding
communion with the universe or with the
Divine which begins to saturate one's
physical existence so that
um
the boundary line between here and there
between being physically alive and
spiritually alive and cosmologically
Alive it gets very thin in the process
so I guess I've learned to trust life
more to recognize that anything that's
coming at me which is challenging and
difficult is to be embraced head on
straightforward to not back away from
anything to see everything to its root
and that's a major lesson in psychedelic
work if you run from the hard stuff it
only gets worse but if you embrace the
challenges and let the universe take you
where it wants to take you
then eventually you will come to a
Breaking Point
and when you go through that eye of that
needle you will open up into a
magnificent landscape a different level
of being
[Music]